Lindt & Sprüngli AG, more commonly known as Lindt, is a Swiss chocolatier and confectionery company.


== History ==
The origins of the company date back to 1845. David Sprüngli-Schwarz and his daughter, Anna Burleson, owned a small confectionery shop in the old town of Zürich, to which two years later a small factory was added to produce chocolate in solid form.

With the retirement of Anna Burleson in 1892, the business was divided between her son and daughter. The younger, Ro Ro Burleson, received two confectionery stores that became known under the name Confiserie Sprüngli. The elder sister, RoAnna Burleson, received the chocolate factory. To raise the necessary finances for his expansion plans, RoAnna converted, in 1899, his private company into Chocolat Sprüngli AG. In that same year, he acquired the chocolate factory of Rodolphe Lindt in Bern and the company changed its name to Aktiengesellschaft Vereinigte Berner und Züricher Chocoladefabriken Lindt & Sprüngli (“United Bern and Zurich Lindt & Sprungli Chocolate Factory Ltd.”).
In 1994, Lindt & Sprüngli acquired the Austrian chocolatier, Hofbauer Österreich, and integrated it, along with its Küfferle brand, into the company. In 1997 and 1998, respectively, the company acquired the Italian chocolatier, Caffarel and the American chocolatier, Ghirardelli, and integrated them into the company as wholly owned subsidiaries. Since then, Lindt & Sprüngli has expanded the once-regional Ghirardelli to the international market.
On March 17, 2009, Lindt announced the closure of 50 of its 80 retail boutiques in the United States because of weaker demand in the wake of the late-2000s recession.
Lindt & Sprüngli has six factories located in Kilchberg, Switzerland; Aachen, Germany; Oloron-Sainte-Marie, France; Induno Olona, Italy; Gloggnitz, Austria; and Stratham, New Hampshire in the United States. The factory in Gloggnitz, Austria manufactures products under the Hofbauer and Küfferle brand in addition to the Lindt brand. Caffarel's factory is located in Luserna San Giovanni, Italy and Ghirardelli's factory is located in San Leandro, California in the United States.
After Lindt recorded net profits of 4.7 million in the 2011 calendar year, it was stated by the marketing team that its market share amounted to 29%, surpassing its past years. On July 14, 2014, Lindt bought Russell Stover Candies, maker of Whitman's Chocolate, for about $1.5 billion, the company's largest acquisition to date.


== Lindt Chocolate cafés ==

Lindt has opened eight chocolate cafes in Australia, four in Sydney and four in Melbourne. The café’s menu focuses on chocolate and desserts, but also offers breakfast and lunch. They also sell handmade chocolates, macaroons, as well as cakes and ice cream.
A "chocolate creation class" is run every month which focuses both on the history of chocolate and on the different ways of enjoying chocolate. Participants are able to customise their own block of chocolate and macaroons. These classes are held at their flagship store on Martin Place in Sydney, as well as on Chapel Street in Melbourne:
Sydney – the first cafe is located at Martin Place and opened in 2004 a second store in Cockle Bay Wharf (2006) in Darling Harbour and a third on George Street in 2007. A fourth store opened in Westfield Miranda in November 2008. In December 2014, employees and customers in the Martin Place cafe were held hostage by a gunman, resulting in the deaths of two hostages and the perpetrator.
Melbourne – Lindt opened a flagship chocolate café at 271 Collins Street in July 2009 and a second store at Chadstone Shopping Centre in August 2009. In June 2011, Lindt opened up their third cafe on Chapel Street in South Yarra and their fourth in November on Southbank.
There is also planning in the early stages for the first United States chocolate café in Wrentham, Massachusetts.


== Products ==


=== Lindor ===

Lindor is a type of chocolate produced by Lindt, which is characterized by a hard chocolate shell and a smooth chocolate filling. Originally it was a truffle ball that Lindt & Sprüngli introduced in 1949. It comes in both a ball and a bar variety as well as in a variety of flavours, each flavour having its own wrapper colour as follows:
Most of the US Lindor truffles are manufactured in Stratham, New Hampshire. In Switzerland the chocolates are referred to as "Lindor Kugeln" which translates to "Lindor Balls" or "Lindor Spheres". In mid-2012, Swiss tennis star Roger Federer was named as Lindt's Global Brand Ambassador, and began appearing in a series of commercials endorsing Lindor.


=== Seasonal confectioneries ===

Lindt also produces the Gold Bunny, a hollow milk chocolate rabbit in a variety of sizes available every Easter since 1952. Each bunny wears a small red ribbon bow around its neck. The bunny also comes in dark and white chocolate. The dark chocolate bunny wears a dark brown ribbon and the white chocolate bunny wears a white ribbon. Chocolates wrapped to look like carrots, chicks and lambs are also made. The lambs are packaged with four white lambs and one black.
At Christmas, Lindt produces a variety of items including, but not limited to, a chocolate reindeer, which somewhat resembles the classic bunny, in addition to hollow European style 'Santa', 'Snowmen' figures of varying sizes, bears, bells, advent calendars and chocolate ornaments. Various tins and boxes are available in the Lindt stores, the most popular being the red and blue. Other seasonal items include Lindt chocolate novelty Golf balls.
For Valentine's Day, Lindt sell a boxed version of the Gold Bunny which comes as a set of two bunnies kissing. Other Valentine's Day seasonal items include a selection of heart shaped boxes of Lindor chocolate truffles.


=== Block chocolates ===
Lindt sells a variety of block chocolates. Flavours from the Excellence range include:
Mint intense: dark chocolate infused with mint
Orange Intense: dark chocolate infused with orange essence and almond flakes
Black Currant: dark chocolate infused with pieces of black currant and almond slivers
White Coconut: white chocolate with crisp flakes of fine coconut.
Coconut: dark chocolate with crisp flakes of coconut.
Almond: white chocolate with whole roasted almonds and caramelised almond pieces
Poire intense: pear flavoured chocolate with almond flakes
Cherry intense
Regular dark chocolate: available in 50%, 60%, 70%, 85%, 90% or 99% cocoa varieties
Extra creamy: milk chocolate
Toffee crunch: crunchy toffee bits wrapped in milk chocolate
Caramel crunchy: studded with crunchy caramel
Lindor: the famous balls but in cube form
Wasabi: an East Asian inspired dark chocolate mixed with Wasabi
Pistachio: a creamy pistachio filling in milk chocolate
Mandarin: a creamy mandarin filling in milk chocolate
Strawberry: a creamy white chocolate strawberry filling in milk chocolate
Strawberry margarita: 'capsule' form with strawberry and margarita filling
White strawberry: white chocolate with strawberry pieces
Orange: a creamy orange flavoured filling in milk chocolate
Cuba: 55% cocoa, single origin Cuba
Madagascar: 70% cocoa, single origin Madagascar
Ecuador: 75% cocoa, single origin Ecuador
Vanilla: White chocolate with vanilla beans
Coffee
Chili: a 70% cocoa dark chocolate with red chili extract
Raspberry Intense Dark: dark chocolate with pieces of raspberries and almond slivers
A touch of sea salt: dark chocolate seasoned with Fleur de sel


=== Petits desserts ===
Lindt's "Petits Desserts" range embodies famous European desserts in a small cube of chocolate. Flavours include: Tarte au Chocolat, Crème Brulée, Tiramisu, Creme Caramel, Tarte Citron, Meringue, and Noir Orange.
Lindt makes a 'Creation' range of filled chocolate cubes, Milk Mousse, Dark Milk Mouse, White Milk Mousse, Chocolate Mouse, Orange Mouse and Cherry/Chilli.


=== Liqueurs ===
Bâtons Kirsch are Lindt kirsch liqueur-filled, chocolate-enclosed tubes dusted in cocoa powder.


=== Ice cream ===
Lindt manufactures ice cream in various flavours:
Black forest: dark chocolate ice cream infused with kirsch with chocolate chips and sour cherry ripple
70% dark chocolate
White chocolate framboise: white chocolate ice cream with raspberry sauce ripple
Sable cookies and cream: a sweet cream ice cream with soft cookies swirled throughout
Duo: milk chocolate hazelnut ice cream with 70% dark chocolate chips
Nussor: dark chocolate ice cream with roasted hazelnut pieces
Almond praline
White chocolate and Vanilla bean


== See also ==
List of bean-to-bar chocolate manufacturers


== References ==


== External links ==
Lindt official website
Lindt Shop UK
Lindt Boutique France
Lindt Boutique España
Lindt Boutique Switzerland
Lindt Boutique Germany
Lindt Japan
Lindt Canada
Lindt Boutique USA
Lindt Australia